You're well met once again.
So are you.
You come to take your stand here,
and behold The Lady Anne
pass from her coronation?
'Tis all my business.
At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
'Tis very true: but that time offer'd sorrow;
This, general joy.
'Tis well: the citizens, I am sure,
have shown at full their royal minds
As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward
In celebration of this day with shows,
Pageants and sights of honour.
Never greater,
Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.
May I be bold to ask at what that contains,
That paper in your hand?
Yes; 'tis the list
Of those that claim their offices this day
By custom of the coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first,
and claims to be high-steward;
next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be earl marshal:
you may read the rest.
I thank you, sir:
had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your paper.
But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine,
The princess dowager? how goes her business?
That I can tell you too.
The Archbishop of Canterbury,
accompanied with other learned and reverend fathers
of his order,
Held a late court at Dunstable,
six miles off from Ampthill where the princess lay;
to which she was often cited by them,
but appear'd not:
And, to be short, for not appearance
and the king's late scruple,
by the main assent of all these learned men
she was divorced,
And the late marriage made of none effect
Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,
Where she remains now sick.
Alas, good lady!
(trumpets sound)
The trumpets sound!
Stand close, the queen is coming!
A royal train, believe me. These I know:
Who's that that bears the sceptre?
Marquess Dorset:
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
A bold brave gentleman.
That should be the Duke of Suffolk?
'Tis the same: high-steward.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
Yes;
Heaven bless thee!
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel;
Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
And more and richer, when he strains that lady:
I cannot blame his conscience.
They that bear the cloth of honour over her,
are four barons of the Cinque-ports.
Those men are happy; and so are all are near her.
I take it, she that carries up the train
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is; and all the rest are countesses.
Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed;
And sometimes falling ones.
No more of that.
How does your grace?
O Griffith, sick to death!
My legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth,
Willing to leave their burthen.
Reach a chair:
So; now, methinks, I feel a little ease.
Didst thou not tell me, Griffith,
as thou led'st me,
That the great child of honour,
Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead?
Yes, madam; but I think your grace,
Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died:
If well, he stepp'd before me,
happily for my example.
Well, the voice goes, madam:
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at York,
and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
He could not sit his mule.
Alas, poor man!
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the abbey;
where the reverend abbot,
With all his covent,
honourably received him;
and, three nights after this,
About the hour of eight,
which he himself Foretold should be his last,
He gave his honours to the world again,
His blessed part to heaven,
and slept in peace.
So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him!
Yet thus far, Griffith,
give me leave to speak him,
And yet with charity.
He was a man of an unbounded stomach,
ever ranking himself with princes;
one that, by suggestion,
Tied all the kingdom: simony was fair-play;
His own opinion was his law:
i' the presence he would say untruths;
and be ever double both in his words and meaning:
he was never, but where he meant to ruin,
pitiful: his promises were,
as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as he is now, nothing:
Noble madam,
Men's evil manners live in brass;
their virtues we write in water.
May it please your highness
To hear me speak his good now?
Yes, good Griffith;
I were malicious else.
This cardinal,
Though from an humble stock,
undoubtedly was fashion'd to much honour
from his cradle.
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one;
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading:
Lofty and sour to them that loved him not;
But to those men that sought him
sweet as summer.
His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the blessedness of being little:
And, to add greater honours to his age
Than man could give him, he died fearing God.
After my death I wish no other herald,
No other speaker of my living actions,
To keep mine honour from corruption,
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated living,
thou hast made me,
With thy religious truth and modesty,
Now in his ashes honour:
peace be with him!
Patience, be near me still; and set me lower:
I have not long to trouble thee.
Good Griffith, cause the musicians
play me that sad note
I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating
On that celestial harmony I go to.
She is asleep:
good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her: softly, gentle Patience.
Spirits of peace, where are ye?
are ye all gone,
And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for:
Saw ye none enter since I slept?
None, madam.
No? Saw you not, even now,
a blessed troop invite me to a banquet;
whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
They promised me eternal happiness;
And brought me garlands, Griffith,
which I feel I am not worthy yet to wear:
I shall, assuredly.
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
Possess your fancy.
Bid the music leave,
They are harsh and heavy to me.
Do you note
How much her grace is alter'd on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? how pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes!
She is going, wench: pray, pray.
Heaven comfort her!
An't like your grace,
You are a saucy fellow:
Deserve we no more reverence?
You are to blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behavior; go to, kneel.
I humbly do entreat your highness' pardon;
My haste made me unmannerly.
There is staying a gentleman,
sent from the king, to see you.
Admit him entrance, Griffith:
but this fellow let me ne'er see again.
If my sight fail not,
You should be lord ambassador
from the emperor, my royal nephew,
and your name Capucius.
Madam, the same; your servant.
O, my lord,
The times and titles now
are alter'd strangely with me
since first you knew me.
But, I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?
Noble lady,
First mine own service to your grace;
the next, the king's request
that I would visit you;
Who grieves much for your weakness,
and by me sends you his princely commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
O my good lord, that comfort comes too late;
'Tis like a pardon after execution:
That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me;
But now I am past an comforts here, but prayers.
How does his highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do! and ever flourish,
When I shal l dwell with worms,
and my poor name banish'd the kingdom!
Patience, is that letter, I caused you write
yet sent away?
No, madam.
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my lord the king.
Most willing, madam.
In which I have commended to his goodness
The model of our chaste loves,
his young daughter;
The dews of heaven fall thick
in blessings on her!
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding
She is young, and of a noble modest nature,
I hope she will deserve well,
and a little to love her for her mother's sake,
that loved him, heaven knows how dearly.
My next poor petition is,
that his noble grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women,
that so long have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully:
Of which there is not one, I dare avow,
And now I should not lie,
but will deserve for virtue
and true beauty of the soul,
For honesty and decent carriage,
A right good husband,
let him be a noble
and, sure, those men are happy that shall have 'em.
The last is, for my men;
they are the poorest,
But poverty could never draw 'em from me;
That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,
And something over to remember me by:
If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole contents: and, good my lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor people's friend,
and urge the king to do me this last right.
By heaven, I will,
Or let me lose the fashion of a man!
I thank you, honest lord.
Remember me in all humility unto his highness:
Say his long trouble
now is passing out of this world;
tell him, in death I bless'd him,
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim.
Farewell, my lord.
Griffith, farewell.
Nay, Patience,
You must not leave me yet: I must to bed;
Call in more women.
When I am dead, good wench,
Let me be used with honour:
strew me over with maiden flowers,
that all the world may know I was a chaste wife
to my grave:
embalm me, then lay me forth:
although unqueen'd,
yet like a queen, and daughter to a king, inter me.
I can no more.